===============================================================================================

An ENTRYPOINT allows you to configure a container that will run as an executable
The main purpose of a CMD is to provide defaults for an executing container
If you would like your container to run the same executable every time, then you should consider using ENTRYPOINT in combination with CMD
ENTRYPOINT/CMD has 2 forms:
exec form: ["echo", "hello", "world"] - preferred form, but doesn’t support shell env variables
shell form: echo hello world - supports shell env variables
Both ENTRYPOINT and CMD specify what process (simply saying command) should run in the container as a main process.

CMD is an instruction designed for establishing a default command that users can conveniently modify based on their specific needs.
When a Dockerfile contains multiple CMD directives, it’s crucial to note that only the instructions from the last CMD will take effect, allowing for clear and predictable customization of the container’s default behavior.

TASK 1
Create /tasks/1/Dockerfile, base image: alpine
Install figlet package with apk tool
Define CMD to run figlet hello world command
Build dtyuev/figlet:1 image
 For this task both forms of CMD (shell or exec) do the same, no difference!

FROM alpine
RUN apk add figlet
CMD figlet hello world   # or CMD ["figlet", "hello", "world"]

docker build -t dtyuev/figlet:1 .
docker run dtyuev/figlet:1
 _          _ _                            _     _ 
| |__   ___| | | ___   __      _____  _ __| | __| |
| '_ \ / _ \ | |/ _ \  \ \ /\ / / _ \| '__| |/ _` |
| | | |  __/ | | (_) |  \ V  V / (_) | |  | | (_| |
|_| |_|\___|_|_|\___/    \_/\_/ \___/|_|  |_|\__,_|
docker run dtyuev/figlet:1 figlet 'hi there!'

===============================================================================================
TASK 2
By running container, replace image default cmd with your own.
 Don’t change Dockerfile!

docker run dtyuev/figlet:1 figlet 'hi there!'
 _     _   _   _                   _ 
| |__ (_) | |_| |__   ___ _ __ ___| |
| '_ \| | | __| '_ \ / _ \ '__/ _ \ |
| | | | | | |_| | | |  __/ | |  __/_|
|_| |_|_|  \__|_| |_|\___|_|  \___(_)

docker run dtyuev/figlet:1 figlet -f script 'hi there!'
 _               _                    
| |    o        | |                  |
| |         _|_ | |     _   ,_    _  |
|/ \   |     |  |/ \   |/  /  |  |/  |
|   |_/|_/   |_/|   |_/|__/   |_/|__/o

===============================================================================================
TASK 3
In that case, it makes sense to split entire command into 2 parts:

“main command” - implemented by ENTRYPOINT
its “arguments” - implemented by CMD (in cojunction with ENTRYPOINT)
ENTRYPOINT	CMD
figlet	hello world
 In this task we have to use exec forms of ENTRYPOINT and CMD, otherwise it won’t work!

Create /tasks/3/Dockerfile, you can use /tasks/1/Dockerfile as an example
Define figlet -f mini as ENTRYPOINT ( use exec form)
Specify hello world as CMD ( use exec form)
Build dtyuev/figlet:3 image

FROM alpine
RUN apk add figlet
ENTRYPOINT ["figlet", "-f", "mini"]
CMD ["hello", "world"]

docker build -t dtyuev/figlet:3 .

docker run dtyuev/figlet:3
|_  _ || _       _ ._| _| 
| |(/_||(_) \/\/(_)| |(_| 

docker run dtyuev/figlet:3 hi there
|_ o  _|_|_  _ .__  
| ||   |_| |(/_|(/_ 

docker run dtyuev/figlet:3 -f slant hi there
    __    _    __  __                 
   / /_  (_)  / /_/ /_  ___  ________ 
  / __ \/ /  / __/ __ \/ _ \/ ___/ _ \
 / / / / /  / /_/ / / /  __/ /  /  __/
/_/ /_/_/   \__/_/ /_/\___/_/   \___/ 

===============================================================================================
TASK 4
Create /tasks/4/Dockerfile, you can use /tasks/1/Dockerfile as an example
Define figlet -f smslant as ENTRYPOINT ( use exec form)
Specify hello world as CMD ( use shell form)
Build dtyuev/figlet:4 image

FROM alpine
RUN apk add figlet
ENTRYPOINT ["figlet", "-f", "smslant"]
CMD hello world

docker build -t dtyuev/figlet:4 .

docker run dtyuev/figlet:4
    ___     _          __   _                    _          _ _       
   / / |__ (_)_ __    / /__| |__           ___  | |__   ___| | | ___  
  / /| '_ \| | '_ \  / / __| '_ \   _____ / __| | '_ \ / _ \ | |/ _ \ 
 / / | |_) | | | | |/ /\__ \ | | | |_____| (__  | | | |  __/ | | (_) |
/_/  |_.__/|_|_| |_/_/ |___/_| |_|        \___| |_| |_|\___|_|_|\___/ 
                                                                      
                    _     _ 
__      _____  _ __| | __| |
\ \ /\ / / _ \| '__| |/ _` |
 \ V  V / (_) | |  | | (_| |
  \_/\_/ \___/|_|  |_|\__,_|

docker run dtyuev/figlet:4 hi there
 _     _   _   _                   
| |__ (_) | |_| |__   ___ _ __ ___ 
| '_ \| | | __| '_ \ / _ \ '__/ _ \
| | | | | | |_| | | |  __/ | |  __/
|_| |_|_|  \__|_| |_|\___|_|  \___|

# Conclusion:
So, “hello world” from CMD instruction goes to default image CMD which is /bin/sh -c and all of this comes to our ENTRYPOINT.

Docker runs following process:

figlet /bin/sh -c hello world
But in the 2nd example it replaces this mess of /bin/sh -c and hello world to the command we are providing:

figlet hi there


===============================================================================================
TASK 5
1. Try Shell Form:
1.1. Create /tasks/5/Dockerfile-shell, base image: alpine
1.2. Define environement variable VERSION equal to v1.2.3
1.3. Set CMD in shell form: echo VERSION=$VERSION
1.4. Build dtyuev/figlet:5-shell image

2. Try Exec Form:
1.1. Create /tasks/5/Dockerfile-exec, base image: alpine
1.2. Define environement variable VERSION equal to v1.2.3
1.3. Set CMD in exec form: ["echo", "VERSION=$VERSION"]
1.4. Build dtyuev/figlet:5-exec image

FROM alpine
ENV VERSION=v1.2.3
CMD echo VERSION=$VERSION
docker build -t dtyuev/figlet:5-shell -f Dockerfile-shell .

FROM alpine
ENV VERSION=v1.2.3
CMD ["echo", "VERSION=$VERSION"]
docker build -t dtyuev/figlet:5-exec -f Dockerfile-exec .

# With “shell” CMD form:
docker run dtyuev/figlet:5-shell
VERSION=v1.2.3
docker run -e VERSION=v2.3.4 dtyuev/figlet:5-shell
VERSION=v2.3.4
# With “exec” CMD form:
docker run dtyuev/figlet:5-exec
VERSION=$VERSION
docker run -e VERSION=v2.3.4 dtyuev/figlet:5-exec
VERSION=$VERSION

What happens?
Command in “shell” form goes to /bin/sh and it evaluates variable to its value. With “exec” form this doesn’t happen.

But with the strong desire you could work around this:

CMD ["echo", "VERSION=$VERSION"]
CMD ["/bin/sh", "-c", "echo VERSION=$VERSION"]
# change into Dockerfile-exec CMD as:
CMD ["/bin/sh", "-c", "echo VERSION=$VERSION"] 

==============================================================================================
TASK 6
Please pull mariadb:latest image, inspect it and answer the questions below:
Q1 What is mariadb:latest ENTRYPOINT?
docker history mariadb:latest | grep ENTRYPOINT
<missing>      2 months ago   ENTRYPOINT ["docker-entrypoint.sh"]             0B        buildkit.dockerfile.v0

Q2 What is mariadb:latest CMD?
docker history mariadb:latest | grep CMD
5bf2b86cbac5   2 months ago   CMD ["mariadbd"]                                0B        buildkit.dockerfile.v0
<missing>      2 months ago   /bin/sh -c #(nop)  CMD ["/bin/bash"]            0B        

===============================================================================================
# Summary ENTRYPOINT & CMD
Here’s a summary of using ENTRYPOINT and CMD instructions in a Dockerfile:

CMD Instruction:

Used to provide default values for an executing container.
Specifies the default command and/or parameters that will be executed when the container is run.
If a Dockerfile has multiple CMD instructions, only the last one takes effect.
The CMD instruction can be overridden at runtime by providing arguments to docker run.
ENTRYPOINT Instruction:

Similar to CMD, but the main difference is that it provides an executable specifically as the default command.
Unlike CMD, the command and its parameters are not ignored when Docker runs the container with an alternative command.
If a Dockerfile has both CMD and ENTRYPOINT instructions, the CMD instruction’s arguments are appended to the ENTRYPOINT.
Best Practices:

Use CMD to set the default command that can be easily overridden.
Use ENTRYPOINT to set the main command for the container. It’s often used with CMD to provide default arguments.
Combine ENTRYPOINT and CMD judiciously to make your image more flexible and configurable.
If you need to run the container as an executable (e.g., docker run myimage arg1 arg2), use ENTRYPOINT.
Remember that both CMD and ENTRYPOINT can be overridden at runtime by providing arguments to the docker run command.

===============================================================================================